This is an interview with Mr. Aubrey Grice by
Stuart Dunn on April 16, 1989 at the home of Mr.
Grice concerning the dropping of the bomb on
Hiroshima. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge about the war, I'm going to donate this
tape to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection in
the University Archives. Mr. Grice, is this okay
with you? Yes. Thank you. Mr. Grice, when were you
born? December 13, 1923. That's not that long ago.
65 years. What was your educational background?
Well, in the beginning, I grew up on a farm in East
Texas. I went to a little two-room schoolhouse
through the eighth grade.
Then I rode a school bus into a little town in
Winsboro, about eight miles away. and completed
high school there, graduated in 1940, just after I
turned 16. So we had 11 grades then instead of 12.
And then for the next few years I worked in Dallas
and got my father on the farm until World War II came
along, and then I started some of my other
education during and after that. Was it a college
education? Yeah, after the war. I got out in 1946
and went to Southern Methodist University here in
Dallas, and was graduated in August 1948. Okay.
Brother Grice, when did you get into the service?
In April 1943. April of 1943. And why did you join
the service? Well, you know, the Japanese had
attacked Pearl Harbor in 1941, and everybody
was going in that time, and I would have been
drafted, I was, in 1943, I was 19,
and I was at the age, they had just, when they first
started drafting people into the war, they was 21.
And then after a while, or a little bit after Pearl
Harbor, I think there, I can't remember the exact
time, but they lowered it to 18. And so I knew that I
was going to be drafted and have to go into service,
and I always wanted to fly. Little guy down on the
farm, I'd stop and watch airplanes fly over.
Whatever I was doing. Yeah, and I just was
fascinated by airplanes, and so I wanted to fly,
and so I had an opportunity to volunteer to get into
the Army Air Corps at that time. Later became the US
Air Force. And so I went in and took all my
examinations and everything and passed and got
in. Super. As a cadet. That's super. How did you go
about joining? Well, I talked to my folks and of
course I was, at that time the legal age was 21.
instead of 18. And so I had to have their
permission. But I talked to them, and they said,
well, if that's what you want to do, that's fine.
You're going to have to go in anyhow. You're going
to be drafted at some point. You may as well do what
you want to do. So they were very cooperative. And I
believe we went to Tyler about 50 miles away to a
recruitment office and talked with the Air Force
down there and my father and me. And I came back, and
I took some tests. No, they sent me to Greenville,
up to Greenville, Texas, to have a physical. And so
between all the
tests, both the physical tests and the health
tests and the whole thing, I was accepted. It was
really pretty simple then. What were your duties
while you were in the service? First thing I did
after I got into the service, we were sent up to
Wichita Falls, Texas as an induction center. We
were supposed to be there and have some very tough
basic training for about 12 weeks. And after I was
there about three weeks, they sent a bunch of us up
to Stillwater, Oklahoma at that time. And that's
when we really started cadets. We were enrolled in
school there at Oklahoma State, that time
Oklahoma A&M. Right. And we were there for about
three and a half months. And mostly we were
studying things like history, physics.
We got to fly in little Piper Cubs for about, I think
we had about six hours at that point. First time I
had ever been in an airplane. Was in a piper club?
Was in a piper club. How did you like that? Oh, loved
it. I thought this was the greatest thing ever.
That's one of my friends has one of those. That's
great. So would you want me to kind of continue with
through like this then? Yeah. For a while? So we
were there for three and a half months. Most of that
was studying and some basic training and some,
particularly physical training. We had some,
they had the Oklahoma A&M program. football coach
squad that gave us our physical education. And by
the time we left there, we could run a five mile
cross country at a very good pace and not be panting
very much really. We really were in good shape,
tremendous shape. And then we were, after we
completed that, we went to San Antonio to We were,
for several weeks, we were just in batteries of
tests every day. More physical education and
things like that. And a few classes, films and so
forth, to teach us about different things, but
mostly just for classification purposes. And
that's where, through tests and different
things, it was determined whether you would be
eligible for pilot school, or a navigation school
or a bombardier school. So I fortunately, I was
able to continue on with my ambition of being a
pilot and completed that. And then from there we
were transferred to Santa Ana, California, where
we had what's called pre-flight. Again, more
studies, more physical education, more
drilling, Discipline. Learning a lot of
discipline. So we went through that and then from
there I went up to Merced, California for primary
training. And we flew Stearman's. I don't know if
you know what a Stearman is. I know exactly what a
Stearman is. Bi-wing, open cockpit, two seats in
each wing. That was a riot. That was more fun.
have fun with it, and do everything with it. And
everyone's ambition was, we wore helmets and
goggles. You looked like World War I pilots. And
the airplane was almost World War I vintage. But
you couldn't wear a scarf until you had solo. And
then you could wear a white scarf. And we, once we
soloed, we had a, we were, we all had and wore a white
silk scarf about eight feet long. And it would
trail out to
the air. It was great fun. That was just fun in that
flying school. It was just really fun. We were
really on our toes and had to be very careful. It was
an airplane that was actually difficult to fly and
that was one reason we flew it.
It would
wing ground very easily and flip over on it's nose
because the top wing held the gasoline. If you were
full of gas it was a little bit tight if you slammed
on it.
And if you run into problems, you were in trouble.
They came after you. Yeah. That was funny. How did
you get into the B-29? Well, it's a little bit of
evolution. Went from there, then up to,
from Santa Brea to Merced, California. Flew in
basic training, flew a BT-13, basic trainer
single engine, in that area. From that point, All
the way through, I had requested to be a fighter
pilot. Of course. If not a fighter pilot, then a
twin-engine attack aircraft. And my last choice
was to fly a four-engine bomber. When this was, I
graduated in the class of 44G, so I graduated from
cadet school in August of 1944. It was getting late
in the war. And the war in Europe was essentially
winding down. And they just basically, the
comment was, we really don't need any more fighter
pilots. We got all we need. Every person in my
class, everyone, was sent to Twin Engine Advanced
School. So we came from Merced, California to
Pecos, Texas. to fly a twin engine advanced
trainer. So we all got training in an advanced
trainer. We pretty well knew that that would put us
into a bomber of some sort. So I graduated from
cadet school in August the 4th, 1944. And
came home for the first time in 15 months. Got
married to my high school sweetheart. The
American story, it seems like. Joe Irby. And we had
a good time. We enjoyed it. I was immediately
assigned to a B-17 school in Hobbs, New Mexico. And
we went out there, and she went with me. And by this
time, of course, being an officer, we could take
our wives. we found a place to live off base that we
could afford. And so we enjoyed the three and a half
months there. It was just great. From there we went
to Lincoln, Nebraska to determine where we would
go. Usually either a B-17 group would go someplace
and form a crew and fly, a combat crew, fly with them
a little while and get acquainted with each other
and then go overseas. The war was further winding
down by this point. About half of the group went on
through into B-17s and went into Europe. Some of
them even got overseas. The war just wound up. They
had more pilots than needed and they just didn't
remember. They selected a large group, about half
of them, to go into B-29. aircraft, a new,
relatively new aircraft at that time, flying into
the Pacific. And this was kind of fun because we had
to go through another three and a half months of
training. And they sent us down to Clovis, New
Mexico, to a big airfield down here for this
training. We had been there just about a month into
this training, and they selected three special
crews or formed three special crews out of this
entire group that they wanted to become photo
reconnaissance pilots and crews to do mapping of
Japan and the Pacific for the invasion of Japan and
to do photographic work for the 20th Air Force. So I
was selected fortunately to be among that group
and we spent several months learning a lot about
photography piloting, exactness in flying,
discipline in flying, all the things that are
necessary to really be a disciplined,
good photographic crew for the 20th Air Force. So
your main duty then was reconnaissance,
I guess. Yes. What were some of your most memorable
experiences while you were flying? Oh, if we go
back to cadet area, part of it, that was a lot of fun
in the little things. My first instructor in
primary school was an older fellow who was, at that
time he was older, he was probably in his late 30s,
He had flown the Mayo in an open cockpit aircraft
for the Army. That tells you how old he was, almost
immediately after World War I. And he was a real fly
by the seat of your pants type guy. But he was a great
pilot, a really good pilot. He really taught us a
lot. I think we were able to go through cadet school
largely on the basis of what that man taught us in a
way of discipline and just how do you fly an
airplane. There's a lot of things that go with
that. And I remember he had two cadets. He was one of
the leaders. A man and a guy named Griffin, Red
Griffin, red-headed guy from Georgia. And Bud
Grice from Dallas. We were his two cadets. He came
in one day and he said, motioned both of us to come
over to the aircraft and he stood there and he
looked at both of us and he said, you know, I want to
tell you all a story. He told us a story about two
cadets he had one time. He said one of them was real
sharp but wasn't disciplined and didn't have the
feel. And the other one was just a poor old guy that
could hardly speak the English language. But he
had a feel for airplanes, and he listened and paid
good attention. He said, the guy, this dumb old
guy, he said, he just, he was a fantastic pilot. The
other guy that was a real brain, he just never did
really learn to fly. And he said, it just goes to
show you, the dumber they are, the better you can
fly. He turned around and walked away about 10
feet, stopped, turned around and looked at us, and
he said, you two guys ought to make damn good
pilots.
So I remember him with a lot of chuckles, but I also
remember him for being a great pilot and a great
teacher. And he was that. And a lot of other
experiences. I guess one of my most fun
experiences in B-29,
as photo reconnaissance groups, we didn't carry
bombs. All of our bomb bays were stripped out and
our bomb bays were filled with gas tanks. And we
could fly probably 22 or 23 hours on non-stop
missions. The longest mission I had was 21 hours
and 55 minutes. And it was at the beginning of that
particular mission because we were loaded with
gas. All we could get on board.
We needed to be up to Japan about 9 o'clock in the
morning because the shadows were right to take
pictures and we could, the pictures could be, you
could tell more about the pictures and what they
meant. Right. Height of buildings and different
things. And so we were going to leave Guam that
night at 1.30. Most of our flights we took off at
night, got up there in the daytime. So it was 1,700
miles from there to Tokyo. And B-29s and crews were
about 250, something like that. Used a little bit
more power, didn't need to save fuel. We could,
275. But it wasn't, then it was a fast air crane, but
not today. But we were loaded and our stall speed
was, as I recall, was about 135. And I remember we
were on an 8,000-foot runway when we took off that
night. The moon was shining, and we gave it the gun
with all we had. We got right on the end of the runway
and held the brakes until we revved up the props
full speed and then released the brakes so we could
get all we could go. And at the end of the paved
runway, they had bulldozed the coral back for
probably half a mile. And then there was about a 50
foot rise over a little, actually a little
mountain type thing. And then about a 250 foot drop
to the water just to straighten out the cliff. And
when we went off the end of the runway, we were still
doing about 130. There was no way we could stop. And
we didn't want to hit that cliff out there with
about 10,000 gallons of fuel.
And so we just hit emergency power. gave it all she
had, and we still had some coral. And I had the
co-pilot and said, you read off the speed. And as
soon as our speed hit about 137, just two miles
above that, I just started pulling back on the
stick. And I just, I didn't look at anything except
the airspeed indicator. And if it looked like it
was going to drop, I dropped the nose. And I just
hoped we were going to climb enough to get over the
cliff. And we were sitting there and the plane was
so close to the stall speed until you could feel it
shake. It wasn't really stable in the air. It
needed to be more than two or three miles above the
stall speed to be stable. But then just what seemed
like hours almost was obviously a minute or a
minute and a half. I can see the reflection of the
moon in the water. And I just shoved the nose down.
And we picked up speed and pulled it on out. Climbed
up a little bit, put it on autopilot, and then just
felt my blood turn to ice water. But it didn't turn
to ice water prior to that because you can't. Too
busy. Too many things going on out there to get
scared. But it was a little bit frightening.
Could you please describe your experience and
what you saw on the dropping of the atomic bomb on
Hiroshima? Okay.
Our crew, again, took off from Guam around 2
o'clock in the morning and arrived over the coast
of Japan
probably 8 o'clock or so. Three crews had been
selected to go up on the special mission. We were
designated to go to Hiroshima. Another crew was
sent to another area, and another one to another,
and I'm not quite sure. They had the primary
target, a secondary, and a third alternate. In
case of weather or something, if one didn't work
out, they'd go to another. We did not know what we
were going to photograph. We were told where to be,
be above 30,000 feet, to circle Hiroshima
within a radius of about 10 miles, no closer than
10, and stay fairly close to 10. Keep all cameras on
board, of which we had coverage every angle on the
aircraft except the 45 degree coming up. And we had
every camera going and taking a picture every five
seconds or several hours. And so we were to be
there, arrive at that time, certain time, and just
start circling and observe everything that
happened, be sure the cameras were operating
appropriately, keep them full of film, just keep
everything going. watch what's going on and take a
lot of pictures. That was our instructions. So we
arrived at our target Hiroshima was just off the
nose and we turned to the right so I turned to the
right so I could circle and Hiroshima would be on my
left because I was in the pilot seat. And we began
our circle and before we had just after we had
started to circling.
One of the gunners called out B-29
approaching on the right. And we all looked and we
saw a B-29. As he came across in front of our nose
just a little above us, we could read the marking on
the tail and we knew that the aircraft was from the
20th Air Force And we knew it had either come from
Guam or Saipan or Tinian, one of the three fields.
So we watched it come across. It kind of came over in
front of us across Hiroshima. And then just about
the time it crossed Hiroshima, he really dropped
his nose. Just really a steep dive. And just moved
way on out and turned off to the left a little bit.
And we just observed this, and one of the gunners
just remarked, said, well, let him go. You know, we
hadn't seen anything and had no idea why he was
doing this. And we were observing him, like, you
know, why did he dive out so quickly? And about this
time, then, just this brilliant flash. It was a
sunny and bright day. on the one hand and yet this
brilliant flash just out there in Hiroshima. And
it just covered that area and then of course this
huge orange ball first covered the city and then
you could see debris and this cloud of smoke going
up. And we were at 33,000 feet and it took less than
three minutes for that column of smoke to reach our
altitude. which would give you some idea of the
amount of heat in it because it was rising because
of the heat. And so we, you know, there were
comments like, you know, look at that, what was
that, you know, what in the world, you know, like
this. And we knew that this aircraft had done
something, obviously, but of course none of us had
ever heard of an atomic bomb. And we hadn't been
instructed or anything on what was happening. And
we speculated that, boy, he must have hit a huge
ammunition dump. And someone said, well, yeah,
but there must have been a lot of fuel too because
all that smoke and everything, and you can see the
fires burning and everything. But I mean, it
looked just like total chaos, you know, on the
ground. And then this smoke coming in. So, you
know, for the next 10 to 15 minutes, all kinds of
speculation about the crew and all those,
wondering what in the world had taken place here.
So we continued to circle for, I would guess, about
another two hours. And then, after that time, we
had been instructed to fly over a few miles, but not
too far, and begin mapping. And we would just fly
over to a place go down and fly back across and back
over, just making an aerial map of the entire
Japan. We had a lot of missions that included that.
We'd go up and do special things, whatever they
needed, and then said, okay, after you finish
that, go over and you start at this point, start
mapping, and back and forth, just map, map, taking
pictures, and, you know, preparation for an
invasion, And so we did that, and even during this
time, we had our cameras on board, and we were still
getting pictures off in the distance, probably
30, 40 miles away of this Columbus home. And so we
did this until, you know, mid-afternoon, gas and
fuel were in the position where it was time to go
home. So we headed back for our 1700 mile. slow
descent from there to Guam. How long were you in the
air total? We left about 2 o'clock in the morning
and arrived back at Guam I believe around 9 o'clock
in the evening. That's a lot of hours. What did you
feel, what were your thoughts after you heard
President Truman get on the and get on the radio and
describe what had just happened? Well, we had, as
we came in that evening, we, as always, our crews
were met by intelligence officers from 20th Air
Force Headquarters, just to talk to us a few
minutes, see if we observed anything, if there was
any kind of anti-aircraft or fighter aircraft or
anything. Anything we observed, either there or
on the ground, troop movements, anything, they
always wanted to know about it because all little
bits of information made sense and things. And so
they interrogated the crew for a few minutes and
then we were dismissed and went on with our buddies
and spent a couple of hours in the evening, had a
nice dinner, talked with them for a while. So we
were telling everybody about what we'd seen and
what had happened and what speculation it was. We
said, well, why don't we call the 20th Air Force
Headquarters and find out what they hit. And
everybody said, well, it's kind of late, we'll do
that in the morning. So we all went off to bed. Well,
after a mission like that, we were allowed to just
sleep in the next day. If you wanted to get up at noon
or 6 p.m., you could do it. Because you were really
worn out and tired. After 18 or 20 hours in an
aircraft, you're tired.
Some of my buddies came over and woke me up and said,
hey, President's on the radio. come listen to
this. He's going to explain what you saw
yesterday." And so I jumped up. I was interested
and I went, well this must be something else for the
President to explain it, you know. So we listened
then and we heard the President explain about this
dropping of the first atomic bomb and what it was.
And that's the first thing that we realized and
recognized what this was. And we talked about it
and really they explained about the damage it had
done and the number of people that had been killed.
And they explained about, particularly about the
fact that they had explained this to Japan and what
it was and asked them to surrender. And just gave
them a certain length of time to surrender. And
this brought great joy to us. Everyone on the
island of Guam. I happened to have a nephew who was a
doctor at that time. He was on, he was in the Navy. He
was on detached service with the 6th Marine Corps
Division on Guam. And they were, had been pulled
back from Okinawa and were resting there
recuperating, training and preparing to invade
Japan. And they dreaded it. They knew how fanatic
the Japanese were and they dreaded it. They knew
that perhaps most of them would not return. And so
we had often met and sat and talked about that,
about this invasion. And we were going to play a big
part in it. Of course, we'd be up above taking
pictures and doing things of this nature. On the
one hand, on the other hand, we expected
everything they had to be thrown against us,
anti-aircraft guns, fighter aircraft,
everything. Even suicidal missions to fly, just
fly them into aircraft. So no one looked forward to
that. So here, all of a sudden, when something came
just, you know, out of the clear blue to us that
could potentially end the war any day now, we were
elated. I'm going to be very honest with you. We
were elated. And at that time, And I guess I would
have to say that was my feeling at that point. We
were elated.
What about, what were your feelings when we
dropped the second one on Nagasaki? Well we had
waited these few days to try to see, hoping Japan
would surrender and end the war. And they didn't.
And so the second one was sent over and dropped at
Nagasaki.
Nagasaki. Nagasaki. And we just said, well,
hopefully this will do it. And I guess that was our
feelings then. I don't think anyone relished the
killing of that many people on the one hand. But if
you look at it from our standpoint, where probably
a million or more men would be invading Japan, and
probably half of them or more may never come back,
of our own people. Plus, what that would do, not
just to their soldiers, but their women and their
children. And, you know, there would have been
hundreds of thousands of people killed in that
invasion. Those two bombs killed, what, 200,000
people on that range? And so if you look at it from
that standpoint, there were many less deaths from
those two bombs that ended the war and brought
peace than there would have been had we been
required or necessary to invade China and end it
that way. And so looking at it to that point, from
our standpoint, our feelings, it was a great
blessing, as bad as it was. Overall, it was a great
blessing. And if you really look at it
realistically, there's just no denying that. It
saved many, many lives.
I guess then, in your opinion, we should have
dropped the bomb then for the purpose of stopping
the war. for the purpose of stopping the war. They
took two of them. The first one just didn't do it. I
guess they were so stunned by it, it takes a while
for something like that to soak in, I think. Just,
you know, how powerful this is, what it can do. And
very shortly after the second one was dropped, of
course they did surrender. Total, unconditional
surrender.
We put them back on their feet again, and they've
done very well since. Yes. Very, very well.
And in September of 1965, a writer for the New York
Times by the name of William L. Lawrence, who
actually was in the bomb, or the plane that carried
the bomb to Nagasaki, he was writing in regards
to... to that bombing. And one of his quotes, it
says, does one feel pity or compassion for the poor
devils about to die? Not when one thinks of Pearl
Harbor or the death march on Bataan. Were these
sentiments kind of the feeling of everybody out
there? Or, you know, if so, explain. Do people
really believe that? Yeah, I think so. You know,
here, I was a 19 year old guy through my training. I
was a 20 year old when I experienced this. I'd had a
lot of experiences in life and gained a lot of
maturity over, because of the circumstances at
the time. But I was young. And really, we had been
taught all the way through cadet school and films
and everything. to, I mean, basically to hate the
Japanese. Because of Pearl Harbor, because of the
way they fought, because of the way they treated
our prisoners.
You were just almost taught that they were just not
human beings. In a sense. That, you know, to wipe
them off the face of the earth would be good rhythm,
so to speak. It was almost like that. And I'm saying
this on a hindsight basis, but we were, we were
really Well, they were the enemy. It was destroy
them before they destroy you type situation.
Self-defense. You get them, they get you. Be
alert. Don't be tricked. In fact, we were very
explicitly told, if you get shot down, if it's at
all possible, don't bail out because you probably
will never reach the ground. And history taught us
this. They'd shoot you in a parachute. Or if they
captured you, they might just cut your head off.
You may or may not be in prison. If you did get in
prison, it would be horrible. If possible, glide
out or anything you can do and ditch in the ocean or
bail out over the ocean or whatever. But if you can
get away from the coast, do so. Even if you can land
in Tokyo Harbor. And we had, it wasn't known
outside to us and a few other people at the time, we
had submarines in Tokyo Bay that would pick up
pilots and bring them back home. And air crew
people and a lot were saved. They would get out away
from the land and the submarine would stick the
periscope up, you could throw a rope over and
they'd just tow you out. until dark or it was far
enough away and they'd done it around the surface,
bring you on board and gone. So we were taught about
this, we were trained like this. We didn't think
much about the poor devils down there. After what
they did to Pearl Harbor and stuff like that. That
wasn't in our makeup at that time, it wasn't in our
training. We were not taught compassion. Not
during the war? Not at that time. I just read that
statement, and I just found it kind of interesting
that he wrote that, because it really kind of hit
me. Something that I thought a lot of people would
kind of feel the same, or I didn't know if anybody
felt different. Well, you know, today, in the
light of day, you think about it, and obviously you
would have compassion about one person who is
about to die, let alone If you actually knew, I'm
going to drop this bomb and 100,000 is going to die.
Even in times like that, I suppose, if you really
knew exactly what you were about to do and the
circumstances there, I'm sure you'd have some
compassionate thoughts about it. You'd know that
some of those were soldiers and things that you
were taught to kill, but you'd also know that there
were a lot of mothers, a lot of children, a lot of
babies, Many things. I don't think you could help
but think of your mother, your sisters, your
little brothers, your nieces and nephews. I
think you'd shake your head. You'd go ahead and do
your duty. But you would have some compassion.
Definitely so. How do you feel about atomic
weapons now and the way they've developed? I think
they've been overdeveloped to a large extent.
I believe, you know, Stuart, it's extremely
important
and maybe this is the will of the Lord that the
United States develop this weapon first. We used
it twice to end war, a very great and bloody war. The
bloodiest part was still to come, and we avoided
that by the use of these two bombs. It's my opinion
that our possession of that bomb has kept the peace
over these years. I fully believe that. I think
there are forces on this earth, have been, and
still even today, that would love to conquer the
United States of America and have a different form
of government here. Totalitarian, communist,
both of which are totalitarian, or whatever.
We're a free nation. We're the envy of everyone.
And we have the freedom that people envy and enjoy.
And they would like to take that away from us. I
believe the atomic bomb, its possession, by our
country has protected us from no telling what.
There have been wars, but they have been limited
wars. They've been smaller wars, so to speak.
Simply because they were afraid to expand it to the
point to where we or anyone else would use the
atomic bomb. And so Because of that, I think it has
been a great deterrent.
We and all of us have too much of it now. The only fear
I have, I don't particularly fear us having it, I
don't fear Russia having it. Because it's a
standoff. And neither one of us will take that
step. My great fear right now would be some lunatic
type individual, the head of a government, or of a
terrorist organization that would somehow
acquire one of these and use it for blackmail or for
the great destruction it can cause. And there are
people of that mindset around them,
unfortunately, but they are.